Industrial accidents, product recalls,
lawsuits, natural disasters, market crashes.
These are just a few examples of business crises
or unexpected and large-scale events
that threaten the stability of your business.
And if you think that your company
is immune to a crisis, then think again.
Crises strike companies of all sizes,
industries, and track records.
They can be difficult to predict,
and they're sometimes impossible to prevent.
So, how can you minimize
the potential damage of a crisis
and prepare for the worst?
You can practice effective crisis management,
which you'll learn about next.
Crisis management is the process
of preventing, containing, and minimizing
the negative impact of a business crisis.
In other words, it's damage control,
and it can be broken down into three stages.
The first and most important stage of crisis management
is prevention and preparation.
Prevention and preparation take place
before a crisis happens.
Planning helps you to systemize crisis management
or make it routine.
A routine saves time
and reduces mistakes or missteps.
Prevention involves analyzing your risks,
identifying the types of crisis
your company is most vulnerable to,
and then taking steps to lower your risks.
Preparation involves building
and training a crisis team,
developing a crisis response plan,
and assigning roles in the event of a crisis.
Prevention will reduce your chances
of experiencing a crisis,
and preparation will equip your team
with the strategy, knowledge, and training
they need to respond effectively when a crisis strikes.
The second stage of crisis management is crisis response.
This stage takes place during a crisis.
It's how you coordinate efforts
to respond to and contain the crisis.
Responding to a crisis involves many steps.
For example, you need to recognize
that you're experiencing a crisis.
Assess the scope of its impact.
Take corrective action
or steps to contain the crisis.
And communicate with the public,
stakeholders, and employees.
The response stage of crisis management
is high pressure and high stakes.
Time is urgent, resources may be scarce,
and your actions may lose
or save your business, or even lives.
Again, that's why doing the legwork
in stage one is so important.
By reducing the chaos, you improve your outcomes
by having a crisis team,
plan, and protocols prepared.
Finally, the last stage of crisis management is recovery.
This is the aftermath of a crisis.
It takes place after the significant threats
of a crisis have been avoided,
minimized, or otherwise handled.
Recovery focuses on rebuilding your business,
reputation, and lost customers or profits.
Another critical component of recovery
is formally reviewing what you can learn from the crisis
and implementing business changes
to avoid similar situations in the future.
Altogether, effective crisis management
is comprised of three stages:
prevention and preparation,
response, and recovery.
You need all three stages
to take a comprehensive approach
to reducing the damage pre-crisis,
during a crisis, and post-crisis.
While you may like to think
that a crisis won't happen to you,
overconfidence can leave your company vulnerable.
Make the crisis management a priority
and put together a crisis team
to get started on crisis prevention and preparation.
It may just save your business.